---
title: A Date to Remember!
author: Madhura Dutta
layout: article
---

In spite of an AQI 453 in Delhi, Deepayan and I planned to step out for
dinner today because we have always remembered 1st Nov as the day we
first met, at a traditionally popular eatery in Kolkata called Hatari. I
am not sure whether it still exists, but at a time when restaurants in
the city were scarce outside of Park Street, Hatari was a well known one
in South Kolkata. For our meeting place however, Hatari was chosen only
because it was a convenient location for both families and our mothers
knew the place (though they were not part of the meeting)!

Placing marriage ads in newspapers must have been one of the most
challenging tasks that our mothers faced, not having any previous first
hand experience about arranging marriages either for themselves or for
their kins. So, once the ad written by Deepayan's mother in Anandabazar
Patrika was noticed by my mother and the families contacted each other
with our respective profiles, a major milestone was achieved. Deepayan
was visiting Kolkata from the US during this period in 2007 for
vacation, and if time permitted, to look for a suitable bride.
Meanwhile, I was shuttling between different districts of West Bengal,
Rajasthan, etc., with small windows of time in between to help my mother
in her search for a groom for me (though I had absolutely no idea what
to look for)!

1st Nov 2007 was a Thursday. The meeting was planned in the evening, and
to my mother's utter disappointment, the other party put the condition
that no parents can accompany us and the meeting would be coordinated
and managed by only respective brothers and sisters. So we settled for
the deal with what we had. Being a single child, I was escorted by my
cousin brother and sister in law, and Deepayan came with his own sister
and one of his sisters in law. I had managed to get out of office early
that day to reach Hatari on time with no expectations about what will
happen there. We all met outside the restaurant (Deepayan was late), and
with a quick and unpracticed introduction, we let ourselves in to settle
in an undisturbed and empty corner table. I do not remember what we had
ordered and whether the waiters disturbed us too much! But clearly the
group that met was inexperienced, shy, and inept at the task at hand,
vaguely smiling at each other to maintain the enabling conditions for
the meeting.

As neither Deepayan nor I were particularly young at this stage, we were
smarter in keeping up with the agenda. Not wasting any time, Deepayan
started the conversation promptly. Of course I do not remember anymore
everything we talked about, but some of the interactions that were
significantly important for decision making included the following
questions for me: Do you like Pixar? Have you watched Toy Story?
(leading to prolonged discussion on Pixar and other animation films.)
Where did you watch A Bug's Life? (conversations about Kolkata
International Film Festival.) Which historical novel of Saradindu has a
character named Madhura? How many shoes do you have?, etc. Once we had
hit it off with these, we went into more serious discussions about
career and life and work and living. Our sisters and sisters in law
could barely make their way into our converation and the only household
question I got was whether I can cook, in which I failed miserably!

After some time, our respective group members took leave from us and
left us to continue chatting, though I still have my doubts about
whether it was done with the conventional idea of leaving us alone.
Anyway, once we were satisfied with our adda we said our goodbyes and
left with no idea about what should happen next, or when and how.

Needless to say, my mother was eagerly awaiting my return to hear the
whole story, but once back home I was in a hurry to pack my bags for a
next morning 6 AM train to Purulia for work. Completely shattering her
expectations of dwelling upon the strengths and weaknesses of a
candidate like Deepayan and analysing the possibilities of this match, I
responded to her in the affirmative stating "He is okay. I can marry
him". Considering it a better idea not to pester me with more details
that night, she left me to organize my trip.

Two days later, as I was travelling down from the Ayodhya hills in a
forest department jeep with the forest officers and my colleague in the
evening, my mother called in an excited voice. The signal being weak in
the highlands, I had to make a lot of effort to make out what she said
and at the same time maintain my outward calm. She reported the
following exhilarating conversation that she had had with Deepayan's
aunt over phone:

D's Aunt: Hello, how are you? What is the news at your end?

Mom: Hello! Good! Good! Yours?

D's Aunt: Good, Very good!

There was a pause and I asked my mother... "So... then what happened?"

She, in a very satisfied tone, said "nothing, then we hung up"!

The first of November after twelve years of our first meeting is still
good! And Good Coffee still works!


