---
title: A Great Cartoonist and I
author: Madhura Dutta
layout: article
---

Shri Reboti Bhusan Ghosh (1921 -- 2007) was one of the great Indian
cartoonists from the golden era of satirical cartoons. He was most
well-known for his animal cartoons. He was the youngest pupil of
Abanindranath Tagore. His cartoons impressed the famous cartoonist
Shankar Pillai so much that he brought Reboti Bhushan to Delhi and made
him the senior artist at Children's Book Trust. The young artist from
Bali in the Hooghly district of West Bengal spent the prime of his
career, around 25 years, in Delhi as a regular cartoonist for various
newspapers and magazines such as *Sachitra Bharat*, *Dainik Yugantar*,
*Dainik Basumati*, *Krishok*, *Jugantar*, and *Satya Yug* where he
mostly drew political satires. He was also an illustrator for the
Bengali animation film "Michke Potash" (the character of a rat) made in
the 1940s. He has designed book covers and illustrated stories by many
well-known authors. He returned home to Bali in the later part of his
life and started cartooning for *The Statesman*, *The Times of India*,
etc. He was not only a cartoonist but also a poet, a writer, and a
singer. He often created his cartoons and poems together, making one
inseparable from the other.

I did not know any of this when I first met him. One morning, in the
year 1997, during my first year of college, as I was preparing to go
out, my father told me that an exhibition by a very famous cartoonist
was going on, and that it would be worthwhile to go and see it. This was
Reboti Bhusan's first solo exhibition in Kolkata, being held at the
Academy of Fine Arts. I had no idea what was awaiting me when I made a
casual visit to the Academy that evening. There were very few visitors
in the gallery when I entered it with a friend. The hall was almost
empty. An elderly couple were sitting in front of a table in the middle
of the room, surrounded by framed cartoons, mostly in black and white, a
few in colour. Bold and easy lines rendered mostly animal and some human
cartoons. They included political satires, as well as simple humorous
drawings, caricatures with poems, and so on. I had never seen anything
like these before, especially the animal cartoons. His works were
completely different from the cartoonists I was used to --- Chandi
Lahiri, R. K. Laxman, Debabrata Chakraborty, Mario Miranda, etc. One
distinctive feature (shared with R. K. Laxman) was the use of brush
rather than pen, a rarity among cartoonists.

Thrilled and satisfied with the exhibition, I was about to leave when
the elderly man caught me at the door. He showed me a comments book and
requested me to put down my name, number, and comments. It was only then
that I realised that he was the great artist himself! After we had
signed our names and expressed how much we liked the exhibit, he did not
let us leave and continued to chat with us over tea. He was particularly
interested in knowing how a couple of young girls like us happened upon
his exhibition; whether we came there by chance, or whether we were
there specifically because it was his exhibition. Seeing the
bewilderment in our eyes, he smiled and said, "Oh! I don't usually get
to meet people from your generation and I didn't think anyone of your
age knew me or any of my cartoons."

Indeed, he was a regular newspaper cartoonist much before our time, and
was active mostly in Delhi. The interaction over tea was an enriching
experience. He narrated various stories about his life and work, and
learned about us with utmost interest. I was overwhelmed by the
simplicity, spontaneity, and accessibility of such a great personality.

Since then we have shared many short but precious moments together in
book fairs, little magazine fairs, and on the telephone. The great
artist, with his child-like excitement and fresh romanticism, used to
talk about how the flowers bloomed in his garden, how the rain fell, and
how the sun energised life on earth. At the time, I was interested in
becoming an artist myself. I had a few productions of frescoes and
posters that I had done professionally. I was quite elated when he
expressed his keen interest in seeing those works, and planned to come
to Kolkata from Bali, where he lived. Unfortunately for me, that trip
never materialised.

Reboti Bhusan's cartoons were almost always accompanied by poems. He
wrote as effortlessly as he drew while sitting and conversing casually.
In the midst of book-fair crowds, at little magazine stalls, he used to
take paper napkins and draw cartoons and write poems on them for me as
naturally as he would greet me. I learned later that he had interacted
with Nandolal Bose when in Shantiniketan, and disagreed with his notion
that good quality paper was a prerequisite for creating good art. Reboti
Bhusan did not need elaborate preparations for his work. He sketched on
anything he could put his hands on, from laundry bills to paper napkins;
such was the force of his creativity and talent. He was always impatient
about capturing all that he saw and liked. Observing him at work always
reinforced the sense that his creations were an integral part of what he
believed, felt, and lived.

He was a great man beyond his identity as a great artist. A romantic at
heart to whom the journey of life was more important than where it took
him, he was thrilled by each new dawn and every new season. He quoted
Rabindranath most often for expressing his feelings, and also loved the
poets of the "Kallol Jug" --- the post-Rabindranath period of Bengali
poetry.

Reboti Bhusan was also an exceptionally humble man with a lot of
politeness and modesty in his approach --- our generation has not
learned such ways of life. Today I often feel that I had been too young
when I met him to appreciate him fully and make the most of this
acquaintance.

