---
title: A Long Long Time Ago...
author: Madhura Dutta
layout: article
---

A few days back we got immersed in an adda of the past, the high strung
humour of a house which had a life of it's own, the people in it who
radiated intellect and the place most comfortable on earth if you wished
to relax and spend some interesting and memorable time, a place highly
sought after. This house was called 202. That was its only identity as
it belonged not only to people who stayed in it on a day-to-day basis
but to all those who visited it. Everyone who cherished this house and
life in it called it 202 and they all belonged there ! All through my
childhood I learned the subtle flavour of this living from my father.

He was an excellent storyteller. I hated fish and rice, the staple diet
of a Bengali house, and every night the painful moments of gulping the
rui machher jhol and rice was sweetened by exciting stories, mostly of
the tiger or the fish. Every night it would be a new story! He was a
writer so I guess it was not difficult for him to narrate a previously
unheard story every time. There used to be the Saturday evening and
Sunday morning "addas" at our place. These sessions used to be highly
interesting. Many different types of people would pour in every weekend
and usually would not go home the entire day. The sessions would start
with "chaa" and "taa" followed by more "chaa" and "taa" and then
lunch, afternoon nap, and evening tea when they would realize that it
was high time that they went home. Some would stay back even for the
night with very light insistence!

Sometimes, in specific groups, my father would read from his manuscripts
the stories he was planning to publish. I remember listening to them and
enjoying not only the readings but the conversations around them. There
were also stories/ incidents/ experiences that he used to narrate from
his own life and the Kolkata he grew up in which were adventurous, scary
and hilarious. Later many of these narrations were incorporated into his
publications, primarily in "Desh", and in different Bengali magazines.

He was an excellent photographer and even had a dark room of his own
when he was young. He never had enough money to buy a good camera during
those days, so he would borrow a camera from his friends when we went on
short trips to Puri or Bishnupur. His photographs of Bishnupur were also
part of exhibitions in Kolkata. He was not ambitious and so could never
make a career out of his skill of photography. I was one of his greatest
appreciators and we would sit and analyse his photographs for hours.
Mostly he taught me framing, choice of subject, exposure, shutter speed
and other technicalities. When I was a little older and he could buy a
camera of his own, we often went out on a Kolkata tour simply for
photography. I remember one of our expeditions after very heavy rains
sometime during the '90s. We went to the South Calcutta lake; the roads
were full of water and we waded through it to click so many beautiful
moments. Unfortunately, we lost all the photographs as the reel had
somehow opened inside the camera.

He taught me to appreciate literature, art, paintings, and music. He
loved classics as well as animations, cartoons, Walt Disney, Asterix and
Tintin movies. He loved RK Laxman, European artists, and the Bengal
school of art. Sudhir Khastagir was a particular favourite. He took me
to art and photography exhibitions to develop the creative sense in me
and had introduced me to several artists through their work. As much as
he liked old English (Santana was a favourite) and Bengali songs, he was
equally open to new ones, always eager to hear new things. It was a
continuous process of discovery and sharing. He became a great
appreciator of Suman, and there were often long discussions on specific
choices and why so. He liked the "Jibonmukhi" Bengali bands as well!
We made choices and developed arguments around those for almost every
creative field. I remember that there was a divide in our house between
the senior and the junior groups (that is my father and my uncle
constituting the former, and my cousin and I constituting the latter) on
who is a more legendary actor - Dilip Kumar or Amitabh Bachchhan. We
never had a reconciliation and never needed one.

The senior Rays were a part of our regular life. My father would often
read out their stories and poems to me multiple times and I would lie on
the floor and listen for hours. During these session, we would laugh
together, stop and reread portions which we liked and laugh again. We
felt, savoured, and saluted their genius in the same way and the
sharing, the humour and the intellectual pleasure just strengthened the
richness much more. Tutu Bhutu, which surprisingly I find very few
people of my generation has read, was also our favourite among others.

He was solely responsible for me being a painter. His organization
exported paper. He brought me all the cut out pieces that his office
would throw away. These papers were of all kinds including basic quality
papers, art boards, and even plastic coated papers (which I loved). He
had once brought me a box of colour pencils, which at that time had
costed him ten rupees, with which if you shaded and then used water with
brush would appear like water colour. However cliched it may sound now,
at that time it was real magic to me! Most importantly, he taught me
proportions and was my greatest critique. I painted almost all the time,
even till very late at night and the moment I finished something I had
to ask him how it was. I remember that often I woke him up even at 2 am
at night to ask how my freshly finished handiwork was and he actually
commented on those at that moment without any complaint. Probably,
having a creative mind himself he knew the untold urgency!

He had a small tunnel shaped cupboard which seemed like a treasure trove
to me. All sorts of interesting things came out of it. Seeing my
inclination towards sketching, one day he took out a box of charcoal for
me (Grumbacher made in USA). The first experience of the first bold
stroke on paper is unforgettable! I never stopped using charcoal after
that, and it is still one of my most favourite mediums. During my school
days, I remember, there was a sudden craze of playing the mouth organ.
Seeing my interest, one day he took out from his magic cupboard a German
made Harmonica which he had carefully preserved for many years.

A few months ago I came to know that my father was writing an
autobiography which he named : "Hridoyer Purono Punthite". I started
reading his unfinished draft and I found the story of how he had been
inspired and attracted to the performance of the legendary Milon Gupta
(who was my father's elder brother's friend and lived across the road
from 202), and had requested his neighbour and a friend, who travelled
far and wide with a job on a ship, to get him one. He has mentioned in
his autobiography that this mouth organ was one of his most precious
possessions from his younger days. Now I have it, and the story makes it
invaluable though with long years of lack of use it does not play
anymore.

Weekends were movie time for us. We went together, just the two of us,
to watch English movies. Every Saturday morning, we would open the
newspaper to chose a movie and after a quick early lunch would head to
esplanade. Sound of Music was my first movie but thereafter we watched
so many - Jaws, The Jackal, Batman, Honey I shrunk the kids, Monsieur
Verdoux, Great Dictator, Ten Commandments, Superman, Supergirl, and Walt
Disney animations and so many others.

After we left 202 RB Avenue the magic of our day-to-day living was lost
in some ways. I think we all lost a part of ourselves with that house.
As I grew older and became busy with my own life our times together
shortened though the elements of fun, humour, and gaiety remained
strong. With time, our closeness weakened and the relationship became
more formal.

Today, as I read through his autobiography, I feel there was so much
more we together could have savoured had we noticed that we were away
from each other for many years and had we not lost the life of 202.

He died on 21st April 2016.

