---
title: A Trip to Remember
author: Madhura Dutta
layout: article
---

I have been visiting Benares for work since 2014, and unlike many
others, the idea of going there for leisure was not particularly
exciting for me. I used to work with handloom weavers staying in
villages around Benaras, and visit our local office which was in the
heart of the city. For my work visits, I had to stay somewhere centrally
located so that I could reach our office or our fields quickly. I did
visit the ghaats a number of times, saw the evening aarti in
Dashashwamedh Ghaat, and also took boat rides on the Ganges. But those
were quick visits, and the anxiety of wading through the extreme chaos
of Godhulia had a much stronger impact on my mind than the ghaat
experience itself! Although I loved the street food of Benaras, the
chaats, thandai, kulfi and malaio (a winter speciality), I was quite
disappointed with the infrastructure and civic sense of the city! I
remember that once, while meeting with the Secretary of the City
Municipality Chairman who was trying to convince me about their great
initiatives for beautification of the ghaats, I told him that the city
infrastructure was poor and needed more urgent attention!

Nonetheless, Benares is undoubtedly a romantically charming place, and
its flow of life does reflect its history, mythology, culture, royalty,
and the cycle of life and death. And it was with the expectation of
experiencing this that I agreed to accompany Deepayan to Benares for a
short holiday. Our plans for this trip had actually started when one of
Deepayan's expat friends decided to visit Benares, in part to find out
the current conditions of her childhood home. This idea of exploring her
childhood home and reminiscing about her life there years ago attracted
me the most, as I sincerely wanted to share her experience of
'Hiraeth', a feeling known to me and very close to my heart.

Following our friend, we booked a luxury hotel on the ghaat without
looking into it very closely, as our primary goal was to enjoy each
other's company in a place away from home. We had known that she would
be travelling with another friend of hers, but I did not pay much
attention to our fourth team member until a couple of days before the
trip; it turned out that she was also a friend of mine from high school.
This was most delightful and we were all excited about seeing each other
after many years.

Our place of stay, the Brij Rama Palace, was located on Munshi Ghaat,
right next to Dashashwamedh ghaat, and was a former palace turned into a
hotel. It was originally built in 1812 by the minister for the estate of
Nagpur, Shridhara Narayana Munshi, after whom the ghaat is named. The
palace was acquired by the king of Darbhanga in 1915, who renovated it
and added more floors as well as an elevator, which was probably one of
the first in India. The building eventually fell into disrepair, before
being bought by the current owners in 1998. It took 18 years of
restoration work to convert the erstwhile Darbhanga Palace into Brij
Rama Palace.

As a humorous aside, and perhaps as a commentary on my experience of
working in Benares and dealing with the local communities, I feel
compelled to add a conversation I later had with one of my colleagues
who had spent a lot of time on our Benares project. When I told her that
it had taken 18 years to renovate the hotel we were staying in, her
immediate reaction was to lament that "everything takes so much time in
Benares!".

The Brij Rama Palace was a beautiful building with very tasteful
aesthetics, expansive balconies overlooking the Ganges, and very
friendly staff! The rooms were pretty, the decor was gorgeous and their
package included breakfast, high tea, and a boat tour to see the ghaat
aarti every evening! There were other chargeable services such as
getting a priest for temple visits, etc.

The hotel is not accessible by car. Their car service picked us from the
airport to take us to Raaj Ghaat, where a boat was waiting for us. The
staff helped us to get our luggage on board, and we had a lovely 15
minute boat ride to reach the Palace. The moment I reached Brij Rama
Palace, I realised that I had crossed this building many times during my
earlier boat rides on the Ganges, and remembered it as one I had always
liked. In fact, I had a number of photographs of the edifice from before
it had opened as a hotel in 2016. The excitement of knowing the
structure from before stayed on as we got showered by the initial
hospitality of the staff. As we started exploring the inside of the
building we found interesting old staircases, paintings and a huge
terrace. We noticed that the terrace and the balconies had wired
fencing, and upon enquiring about the reason a guard at the terrace told
us that these were meant to discourage monkeys who regularly run up and
down the terrace and the balconies. In fact, he seemed happy that we
raised this topic and elaborated on how much of a hassle it is for him
alone to run after the monkeys jumping around on different floors and
that he required more help!

The stay and meeting with old friends made our trip immensely
fulfilling. We felt like free souls dedicated fully and unconditionally
to the mystic life of Benares! Locating our friend's childhood home
(which did not belong to her family anymore) and taking a look around
was a beautiful experience. The hilarious conversations with a local
auto driver who drove us from there to Baati Chokha for lunch and back
to Godhulia were thoroughly enjoyable: He had a single passenger, a
middle aged local lady, when we met him on the road, and he promptly
dumped her to take us on when he heard our destination (for some reason
she didn't seem to mind). Then he claimed that our destination was 15
kms away, when it was actually around 5, and insisted on taking the very
narrow bylanes instead of the main roads, which thoroughly confused not
only Google but even him on several occasions when he had to ask for
directions!

The walk from Godhulia to Dashashwamedh ghaat, stopping at the famous
roadside chaat shop to eat aloo chaat and kulfi while it rained heavily,
buying umbrellas from a local shop, managing our way through the large
number of Shiva worshippers who had flocked to Benares for the Shravan
rituals, shopping for paan masala in the lanes leading to the Kashi
Vishwanath temple, and getting drenched in the rain together were
memorable moments that we will always cherish.

Deepayan's visit to Benaras was more complete than mine because he
accompanied his friend to the Kashi Vishwanath temple for Mangal Aarti,
which starts around 3:00 AM. They left the hotel around 12:30 AM with a
hotel-arranged priest to be able to get front-row seats to see the
aarti. Deepayan, while completely oblivious to the protocols of the
temple and ways of delivering offerings to the Gods, was nonetheless
given the certificate of being good and patient company. Even so,
Vishwanath and Kaal Bhairav and the innumerable gods of the land were
possibly happier with them than the other two of us who spent the night
sleeping! They got back to the hotel around 4:30 AM.

The month of Shravan, being an especially auspicious time, added to our
experience --- the dark clouds, the frequent rains, the brimming
Ganges, the cool breeze and the busy ghaats.... I loved Benaras this
time, and hope to go back again for another magical experience!

