---
title: Life's like that!
author: Madhura Dutta
layout: article
---

Durga Puja has been traditionally a time of reuniting with family and
friends, of going home (for those who stay away), of fun, frolic and
happiness. For me though, it has become more of a nostalgic memory as
the people and the customary glee I associate with Durga Puja have
become lost in time. The most recent feeling I have is one of complete
dissociation from my own city, Kolkata.

Having lost the attraction for the Pandal hopping, maddening crowd,
sound and glitter of Kolkata, I did not mind travelling for work with my
colleagues just before the Pujas to Jaipur.

I had no idea all these years that Jaipur also has associations
celebrating Durga Puja for more than twenty years! I think I did not
wish to find out until now about Puja celebrations outside Bengal. But
living and being with people from different cultures and languages and
from different social backgrounds have taught me a lot over the last
decade. I have met extremely interesting people, worked with excellent
professionals, made great friends, and have gathered stories that have
left me richer and happier. So, I decided to spend this Puja doing new
things, seeing new places, meeting new people and enjoying the ethereal.

The freedom from the usual customs, social expectations and routines was
like fresh air. We visited the Jaipur Durgabari on Shasthi to welcome
the Goddess and her family on the first day of the Puja. We met friends
and made new acquaintances in new spaces, unknown surroundings and in a
different society. We ate great food and had unique experiences that
will continue to stay in our minds.

We got the opportunity to visit a royal family's palace in a small
village called Tordi in Tonk district of Rajasthan. We were awestruck
with the hospitality and stories of the host, a young man who is the
17th generation of the royal family. He was staying in the palace he had
inherited, with his beautiful wife and a three-year old daughter.

With him, we trekked up a sand dune to see the distant sun setting on
the horizon of the Tordi river, listened to hair raising stories of his
forefathers who had looted gold from Afghanistan and had built the Tordi
Fort, which is currently inaccessible and can only be seen at the top of
a nearby hill on the Aravalli ranges. To add to our excitement, he
narrated how some of that gold is still buried underground in the fort.
He also added that many people from the villages around have tried to
find that gold but have failed, and that its location is a family secret
that has been passed down through generations. As the story sessions
continued at the Tordi Palace, where we stayed the night, we also heard
how one of his forefathers had by mistake captured the Ashwamedh
Yagna's horse from Jaipur which was passing through Tordi, and with
great difficulty tried hiding it once he realised what he has done! He
also passionately narrated incidents from his family hobby of hunting
that included leopards, tigers and panthers.

The Palace we stayed in had two parts, one belonging to our host and the
other to his cousin. The entire Palace had about twenty rooms done up
for tourists with all basic amenities. There was proper room service and
great food served in the dining hall. The local desi chicken and laal
maas preparations were brilliant! The next morning, we visited a 2000
years old deity of Gauri in a village temple. It was Maha Ashtami, an
extremely auspicious day even for the locals and we arrived in the
temple during Aarti.

As part of sight seeing we went to see the Tordi dam, the duck shooting
bungalow of Gayatri Devi (currently used by the govt.) and the Hadi Rani
Kund step well in Todaraisingh, an ASI protected monument, on our way
back.

Overall, the weather was cool, the sun was warm and bright, there was a
chill in the air, the breeze was fresh, the moon was half and the sky
was clear and we enjoyed ourselves to the brim!

