---
title: The Magic of Jagannath!
author: Madhura Dutta
layout: article
---


Lord Jagannath has always awed me, not as a God but as a brilliant
work of art! I have often thought about the creator of the idols of
Jagannath, Subhadra, and Balaram. I have saluted the genius mind which
has brought alive this avatar of Narayan - the lines, the face, the
figure, and the colours!

When I say Puri attracts me (which I often do), it is not because Puri
is close to Kolkata and an usual destination for Bengalis. The sea and
these tribal gods have made a strong impression on my mind since I was
probably two, and both have allured me with the inherent charm of
their magical beauty. I used to visit Puri every year with my
parents. I have vivid memories of my stay in a wooden hotel on the
beach, a beautiful balcony flooded with moonlight overlooking the vast
overwhelming dark sea, strong crashing waves capped with white
phosphorous, distant bonfires of the hippies, and sounds of guitars
and the sea wind. The other strong memory is that of the magnificent
idol of Jagannath in the core of the Jagannath temple, aarati, and the
captivating ambience in that cell. My father was instrumental in
making these visits highly interesting with his stories, humour, and
photography. They were always special.

After 23 years I went back to Puri last week to let myself relive the
place and the memories once more, to go back to yesterday once more,
to go back to all the enriching and beautiful things that my father,
mother, and I did together.  This time we could not enter the
Jagannath cell in the temple as it has been closed for some years now,
and felt really bad about it. But on Ma's insistence, we went to
Chakratirtha, of which I had no memory at all.

It was a small, pretty, clean temple housing the three Gods and the
'chakra' embedded in earth in the centre. It was incidentally the time
of 'aarati' and the priest was ready for his evening ritual. We were
the only ones there, and as we watched him perform his rites, he
started explaining about the 'chakra', the significance, the history,
and that people come here to deliver their last offerings to the dead
so that their loved ones are freed from the painful cycle of birth and
death. He explained that only through this offering can one help their
loved ones to cross 'boitoroni' and reach 'boikuntha"!  As he narrated
these practices and norms on quite a serious note, I listened to them
as a story that triggered new knowledge and imagination. I am neither
religious nor philosophical, but something pushed me to deliver my
offerings to my father who died a year ago today.

Puri was still magical and going back made everything sweeter.





