---
title: 'Travel Diary: Chhattisgarh'
author: Madhura Dutta
layout: article
---

A recent visit to Chhattisgarh brought so much hope to me about the
immense value of human capital in our country. It is an amazing state
not only in terms of its natural resources but also its people!
Probably because of our irresponsible and often idiotic news reporters
and media, we have been identifying this state mostly with unrest,
killings, naxalite disturbances, and an overall image of an unsafe
place. The reality was so different!

We did have a little apprehension in our minds while planning our trip
for work, but having local people and organizations as our support, we
were also excited to experience an unknown territory. Our objective was
to get a first-hand experience of the most well known local and cottage
industries of this area, namely, sericulture, tassar silk weaving, thigh
reeling, indigenous natural dyeing, and various tribal art and crafts.
Being familiar with similar industries across the country, what struck
us was the extremely well organised artisan and weaving clusters
completely led by entrepreneurs and business communities with a largely
sustainable and stable value chain. The weavers are organized into
primary weavers' cooperative societies across the state with 18000
functional looms, of which district-wise data was available! On an
average, these primary weavers' societies enjoy about INR 30 lac profit
annually. Other than traders and external markets, govt. departments
provide an average annual business of INR 200 crores!

We visited a number of villages and clusters to meet the weavers and
artisans and talk to them. There was a freshness around, generated by
the highly skilled, bright, proud and confident village youth, both men
and women. There was no sense of a sorry state, no attitude of
complaint, no expectation of aid, but just a strong sense of
self-respect in their traditional work. Even if they were job workers,
youth were happy because they earned sufficient income and had regular
work without having to move out of their villages.

Young entrepreneurs spoke to us with aspirations, integrity and faith in
their own capacities to succeed, open to new ideas, information and
innovation! And all of it was purely business with a value much more
than money!

The villages and small towns had excellent roads, covered drainage, zero
littering and metered power. The local government played a significant
role in ensuring the infrastructure and services, but what was most
apparent was neither the politics nor the parties, but the people, the
relationships, the cooperation, the trust!

We felt the 'good' energy all around us... and wish 'good' news is
also created for all these local heroes!

I hope to go back to see more!
