---
title: 'Travel Diary: Europe 2019'
author: Madhura Dutta
layout: article
---

Travelling to Europe in winter this year was a conscious choice. For
me, the cold is sweetly nostalgic by virtue of my days in the US with
Deepayan. Whenever I arrive at an international airport in peak winter,
a strangely familiar smell soothes my mind.

This time was no different. When we landed in Amsterdam on the last day
of November, the familiar smell made me feel comfortable that I am in a
distant land with my best companion to experience new things.
Amsterdam's Rembrandt Square was warmly welcoming at a sunny five
degrees centigrade on the morning of our arrival. Our hotel room
overlooked parts of the canal, a number of clock towers peeping through
the clouds, and the square itself which was teeming with tourists
hanging out at the innumerable sunlit pubs and cafes with festive
christmas decorations and taking selfies with the statues recreating
Rembrandt's Night Watch.

The prettiness overwhelmed us as we strolled lazily around the
bicycle-city. Flocks of people rode up and down the narrow winding lanes
around the canal in colourful bikes, aimless walkers (like us) often
stopped at various corners to marvel at street-side art, curio shops,
modern art and sculpture galleries, or the neat and beautiful cityscape
along the canals. The cheerful sounds of the city reverberated
everywhere. We eventually found our way to the Museum Square through the
domed gothic architectural pathway of the Rijksmuseum, where musicians
were performing with guitar, harp, and violin for the passers by. The
green field in front of the Rijksmuseum (which included an ice skating
rink) was so green and the afternoon sky was so blue that it seemed they
were freshly painted. The Van Gogh Museum, holding the largest
collection of the Master in the world, stood right across. People were
on the grass lazing, chatting, and beaming in the festive sun! The cafes
around had palette shaped menu boards offering hotdogs and wine. I do
not recollect experiencing this kind of freshness in the air and the
mood in a very long time!

A day long visit to the Van Gogh Museum was one of the best and most
inspiring experiences of this trip. In addition to the brilliantly
curated life story and works of Van Gogh, I was lucky to be able to see
a special exhibit of one of Van Gogh's greatest inspirations,
Jean-Francois Millet. His work was new to me and I was enthralled to see
not only his work with oil, but especially pastels! Millet was an
inspiration for many contemporary artists, especially as a pioneer of
Realism in art and his depiction of scenes from the lives of peasant
farmers.

Just before visiting Europe, I had accompanied a friend in Delhi to an
exhibition of Upendra Maharathi, curated and hosted by the NGMA. Though
he was a pioneer of art in several mediums and has had glorious
contributions in paintings, architecture, furnitures, textiles and
printing technology, the quality of curation and the mindless telling of
his life and achievements was disheartening in comparison. It is sad how
little we know and do about our own heritage.

With my interest in art, one particular reason we had for visiting
Amsterdam during this period was its Light Festival, about which I had
vaguely read but did not find much information anywhere. I have never
quite seen anything like it before: artists used light to tell stories
of the city, their heritage, history, struggles, modernity and change.
It was amazing how a trail was created around the canals connecting
numerous light installations that used either parts of the city
architecture or the canal water! Each installation was accompanied by a
board explaining its story, and a festival map led visitors to the exact
location of each one. This year's theme was 'Disruption', around
which the stories were woven.

Just to give an idea, one of the installations, called Night Drawing,
built its story around Amsterdam's most famous bridge, The Skinny
Bridge. 1800 light bulbs lit up the contours of the bridge at night in
parts to depict a disruptive city image. Another installation was the
Icebreaker, built around the most familiar local experience of skating
on natural ice with the sounds of ice cracking under the skates and the
resulting breaks in the frozen surface! With global warming, skating on
frozen waters such as the Amsterdam canals is becoming less and less
likely. The artwork was created with sensors in a part of the canal
water so that whenever a boat passed, light shaped liked cracks in
frozen ice lit up the water reminding how canals used to freeze in the
past. Another superb presentation was that of the four ominously lit-up
wolves at the edge of the ARTIS Amsterdam Royal Zoo which have gathered
around a group of people who are hiding in the attic of one of the
wooden buildings along the water. This was a call back to the second
World War, with resistance fighters trying to stay one step ahead of
German soldiers. A particularly favourite one was called EUREKA which
tried to show that nothing is as disruptive as science, with its search
for new methods and solutions. At the end of the seventeenth century, a
particular area along the canal called Plantagebuurt became difficult to
sell, and it eventually became a place to recreate, and a place where
science blossomed. The artwork included just a spotlight one could see
on a sculpture of Mother Earth (believed to still lure students to the
University) of the famous Geological Institute.

We walked along the festival route at night, accompanied by several
others, unknown to us, but forming a community of art appreciators! It
is striking how creativity itself is celebrated through such ideas in
its full openness and sincerity. I could not help wonder that we have so
much in India and yet so little in our minds and hearts to do anything
genuinely worthwhile with those!

Another museum we could not miss was a private Cat museum, the
KattenKabinet, which not only held old collected works of art on cats
including paintings, commercial advertisement posters, sculptures, and
photographs but also three real-life good looking cats, two of which
also let us pet them briefly!

We landed in Brussels next, to enjoy the birthplace of the greatest
comics and characters of all times and the city that hosts street art
like no other. We enjoyed the Grand Place, the enormous Christmas tree,
vibrant Christmas markets spread across the city selling knick-knacks,
food and gluhwein (hot wine), the innumerable bakeries filled with
handmade chocolates, waffles and cakes, the official and unofficial
stores selling Tintin, Asterix and all other comic book figurines, books
and other attractive merchandise. We even tracked down two of the three
peeing statues of Brussels, the Mannekin Pis and and the Zinneke Pis.
But the most fun we had was following the comic strip walk, which took
us to various wall arts paying tribute to characters from various
Franco-Belgian comics on the city walls. We figured out after finding a
few that these graffitis are like puzzles, hidden at nooks and corners
of old buildings that would loom up suddenly in front of us at one turn
or the other. These wall paintings are part of a wider project of street
art in Brussels, supported by the city, to help local artists celebrate
and promote its heritage and humour. Again I remembered our own cities
which have so much potential provided the ideas, intentions and
implementation are right!

Our last destination was Paris, a city we have been to before, and feel
like going back to often. This visit was made more interesting by a
historic transport strike (which is still ongoing) that started the day
after we arrived. Having already visited all the highlights on our
previous visit, we took this inconvenience in stride.

Paris specifically attracts me not because of the Eiffel tower or the
Louvre but because it is true to art. The freedom of creative
expressions is immense along with conservation of their heritage in
every form. The last time, I was lucky to experience a special exhibit
of Kandinsky at the Pompidou Centre, and this time I got to see a
special show of Toulouse-Lautrec at the Grand Palais, which fortunately
for us was closed only on alternate days due to the strike. We also
visited the Musée Marmottan Monet to see its private collection of
Monet's work, which though small was quite fascinating. This time, we
also had an invitation to the home of a renowned artist, who was a
friend of a friend, at Monmarte. He has been settled in Paris for 30
years and still considers the city unfolding on him everyday, with so
much more to discover.

We mostly walked around in Paris, partly by choice and partly forced by
the strike, spending a considerable amount of time in the Latin Quarter.
I had decided to buy art supplies from Paris this time. Googling for
stores led us to an interesting shop which apparently was chosen by many
artists because of its knowledgeable and welcoming owner. We found the
shop at the end of a narrow lane. It was small, and not at all designed
for general buyers interested in art. There were racks of materials all
closely stacked and not very well organized. It felt more like a homely
space which was comfortably untidy but extremely attractive for the
right visitors. The experience was like a treasure hunt to find known
and unknown treasures of one's choice. The owner did not know English
but it did not matter as we could draw things we wanted. The other
shoppers (most seemed like regular buyers) who came in were equally
entertaining to watch!

Alongside the intellectual, artistic side of the city, there was the
mundane: local residents unhappy with increasing city traffic and living
costs due to influx of tourists, antisocial groups of unemployed youth,
and the historic transport strike with demonstrations leading to the
closing down of metro, buses and trains as well as heritage monuments
such as the Eiffel Tower. People on the roads were walking or were on
bikes and scooters. Due to lack of staff, many cafes, shops and museums
were closed or opened on alternate days. However, there was still no
dearth of tourists enjoying the cold and festive Paris and we did the
same!

In all the three places the local food, beer, wine and coffee kept us
warm and fulfilled. Mentionable among them were Dutch specialties
Stampot and Hutspot (at a restaurant located in the house where
Rembrandt used to live till he went bankrupt), Belgian waffles, special
beefstew with fries, iconic fruit beer, and gluhwein, and of course
crepes and coffee in various Paris cafes while contemplating life, the
universe, and everything amidst the festive play of the sun and the
rain, the mist and the clouds.


