---
title: Travel Diary - Mumbai
author: Madhura Dutta
layout: article
---

My work has often taken me to various parts of India and abroad, giving
me the privilege of meeting many people of many different places and
cultures. My recent visit to Mumbai and Pune, although not my first
visit to either city, was an exciting one too, especially because of the
short but sweet acquaintances I made on the way, meetings with old
friends in between work, and experiences of local cuisines.

My flight to Mumbai was in the late afternoon, and when I arrived at
Delhi airport I found that all flights have been halted because of heavy
rains and wind in Delhi. When I went down to the scheduled gate, I found
an Indigo staff patiently answering many questions from the distressed
passengers. About ten days earlier, while travelling to Lucknow, I had
been stranded in the same airport for about 7 hours, and had already
learned the right questions to ask to figure out the situation. While
doing so and asking where our particular aircraft was coming from, what
was that flight number, and whether it has taken off from its earlier
destination, I got into conversations with other fellow passengers.
Among them was an ex-merchant navy captain with whom I ended up chatting
during the wait.

We talked about flights, monsoons, work, politics, and Mumbai landings
which are often scarily bumpy during rains. He told me about a time he
was travelling with one of his colleagues, and as the flight badly
bumped in the air close to Mumbai, his colleague had asked him to check
his palm, saying, "Would you check your lifeline once? I can see that
mine has shortened a little!" He was a good speaker and liked telling
stories! When the boarding was finally announced, we walked towards the
end of the queue and it took me a minute to realize that it had bent and
continued further towards the left. I was standing at
the bend and casually said that probably the people in the queue will
not mind if we just join the queue at that point as we had been standing
around for quite a long time. The ex-captain wasn't convinced about the
plan, and said "Well, they probably won't mind if you get in, but they
certainly will if I do!" We walked to the end of the queue and finally
boarded. His seat was 5C and mine was 13C. As I
moved on to my seat I greeted him and he told me "Have a safe flight".
I laughed and said "You too".

As expected, closer to Mumbai the flight became bumpy and jerky and my
face became strained. I was sitting on the aisle and the person on my
right aisle started talking to me, about what book I was reading and
about its content. He was trying to get my attention off the fear.
Meanwhile we had started to descend and the man sitting by the window in
my row drew my attention... "M'm, nothing will happen, look you can
see the city now!"

I usually book a prepaid taxi from Mumbai airport instead of Ola or Uber
because the place from where one has to board the taxi is much better. I
went to the counter and found another long queue in front of the
counter. I was already delayed and felt tired. As I looked around, I
found another counter at the prepaid taxi booth itself, right next to
the other counter, with a board saying "Cabs driven by women drivers".
A solemn looking girl was sitting there at the empty counter, though the
rest of the counters were crowded. I headed to that counter, paid and
took the slip, thinking that I had never been driven by a woman driver
and it might be nice. I went to the prepaid taxi parking where a person
directed me to my taxi, which had an unmistakably male driver, chewing
khoini and not looking very nice. I got into the taxi without a word and
explained where I wanted to go. I was late, and I did not want to get
into a conversation to figure out the reason for this mismatch of
expectation.

The taxi driver turned out to be quite friendly! Once I finished making
a few phone calls to my colleagues and the friend I was supposed to meet
for dinner, he started chatting with me. He was from Allahabad where his
wife and children stayed taking care of his mother. He had come to
Mumbai more than 20 years ago because his grandfather, father and
brother had come here before him, and it was expected that he would too.
I asked him whether he liked it here, and he said that they have a
mohalla where other villagers from Allahabad also stay and that it is
like one big family, and he does feel at home except for missing his
mother and wife and children. He asked me about my whereabouts and I
told him.

After crossing the Sea Link, we both noticed that for a Monday evening,
the Mumbai roads were surprisingly empty. It had rained, so the weather
was cool and the Guru Purnima moon was out in the sky. On finding such
traffic free roads, the driver was particularly ecstatic as I was the
last passenger he was driving before going home. He told me "Madam,
kuchh to hai ki road itna khali hai... aise Mumbai mein nahi hota
hai.... Madam, aap aye aur bahaar aaya ... dekhiye sab traffic signal
bhi pohonchne se pahele khul raha hai!" I told him that
I wish he gets empty roads too to get back home fast, and he told me
"aap ka bauhat bauhat shukriya!". We reached Colaba from the airport
in 35 mins. The driver told me that I could keep his number and could
call him next time I come for work, and I happily took his number. I
asked him what his name was and he smiled at me and said "Madam, likh
lijiye... Khan"! I thanked Khan and headed into Abode Mumbai, the
hotel I was staying at.

I had never stayed in a hotel in Mumbai before, be it for work or for my
PhD at TISS. This hotel was originally an old building called the
Landsdowne House, and I went to the reception / lobby which was on the
first floor. It was most welcoming, and looked more like a very cozy
restaurant. A young man seated with a laptop received me and told me
that he would attend to me in a few minutes, and that I could take a
seat anywhere I liked. There were two more people who were finishing
formalities with this person. I called my colleagues who had arrived a
day earlier for their meetings, and they came out looking most
satisfied. Once I got my room, I was told that we had been upgraded
from a simple to a grander room because they were available. The entire
ambience was warm, welcoming, homely and beautiful. Added to the warmth
of the staff and the rooms was a library attached to the seating area
where one could hang around anytime. On one side of this lobby was a
wall rack where there were small packets of Parle G biscuits stacked
with a label reading "Please take"!

I learned from my colleagues that earlier that morning, for some
accidental reason there was no tap water for a while, causing some
inconvenience to the lodgers. To compensate, the staff had left a bottle
of wine in every room with a note that said "Sorry for the
inconvenience"! My colleagues were thrilled enough to leave one bottle
in my room for a surprise welcome! I was already extremely charmed by
then, and looked forward to a chat and dinner with my colleagues and a
friend who lived nearby at Cafe Mondegar, which was a minute's walk
from the hotel. The Gateway of India was also just a couple of minutes
from the hotel, and we went there to take a stroll post dinner!

The next day, we had meetings to finish in an industrial area closer to
Mumbai and then headed towards Pune by road. It was a fantastic drive,
especially in the monsoons. We crossed Lonavla and found numerous small
waterfalls all around!

My friend had recommended a few places in Pune. One was Kayani Bakery
which is a famous place for biscuits, cheese papdi, sponge cake, and
many other things. It appeared that at any point of time during the day,
lots of people queued up there and kept shouting names of the different
things they wanted to buy. There were about ten people on the opposite
side of the counter, and you were lucky if you could catch anyone's
attention! The other eatery that completely delighted us and especially
me (coming from Kolkata) was Cafe Good Luck (since 1935!) where the
keema fry and pao was to die for!

One day, on our way back from a meeting, we had stopped in a famous
local joint which served Marathi thaali, etc. When the waiter came to
take the order and we asked what the thaali menu was, he blurted out the
list in a distinctly Bengali accent. It turned out that he and many
others working there were Bengalis, and came to work from Ranaghat. When
Bengalis meet unexpectedly in a non Bengali speaking space, they act
like fish out of water that have just been put back into a pond! This
was no different!

Every time I travel, I do feel that the beauty of a place is not its
scenery alone, but its people who make memories so pleasant with their
brief interactions!

